---
layout: page
title: About the Initiative
foo: bar
---

The Open Company Initiative is a group of companies committed to proactively
maximizing trust through genuine corporate transparency and openness.


### Our Vision

Trust is the foundation of the economy. The rule of law establishes a lower
bound of trustworthiness, and today's status quo is for corporations to operate
near this lower bound, getting away with what they can. How much more
productive would our economy be if instead we reached together for an upper
bound of trust?

We envision a world in which corporations are generally trusted, because they
are generally trustworthy. We believe that the winning companies of the future
will be those that proactively maximize trust, not merely doing the minimum
possible to keep within the letter of the law, but going above and beyond to
cultivate an ever-stronger relationship of trust with their customers, their
stakeholders, and society as a whole. We believe that this trust will come
primarily from genuine corporate transparency and openness.


### Our Pledge

We who belong to the Open Company Initiative pledge to proactively maximize
trust through genuine corporate transparency and openness, not as an
afterthought, but as a defining element in how we create value.


### Programs and Operations

We maintain a [directory of companies](/directory/) that pledge to proactively
maximize trust through genuine corporate transparency and openness. However,
the OCI is specifically not a certifying body. Instead, we invite our members
to define for themselves how they will fulfill our pledge. We invite
innovation, and the sharing of both successes and failures. We trust the market
and the court of public opinion to be the final judge of corporate
trustworthiness.

We hold an [annual summit](/summit/), bringing together our members to
learn from one another and promote our vision.

The OCI is housed at [The Saxifrage School](http://www.saxifrageschool.org/), a
higher education laboratory working to lower costs, re-think the campus, and
reconcile theory and practice. The Initiative is funded [on
Gittip](https://www.gittip.com/on/twitter/employeveryone/), and we communicate
primarily [using
GitHub](https://github.com/opencompany/opencompany.github.io/issues).


### Further Reading

  - <a href="http://blog.gittip.com/post/26350459746/the-first-open-company">The First Open Company</a>
  - <a href="https://medium.com/building-gittip/4cbab7ca1a47">The Second Open Company</a>
  - <a href="https://medium.com/p/fdb74d1b4f0f/">Why Open Companies?</a>
  - <a href="https://www.balancedpayments.com/open">Balanced Shifts Toward Open</a>
  - <a href="/resources/whitepaper.pdf">A Whitepaper on Open Enterprise</a>
  - <a href="https://medium.com/the-saxifrage-school/1cc89b9de873">An Open School?</a>
  - <a href="http://theopencompany.net/pages/about-us">The Open [Products] Company</a>
